PEP 706: Filter for tarfile.extractall (#3009)
python/peps: pep-0706.rst

PEP: 706
Title: Filter for tarfile.extractall
Author: Petr Viktorin <encukou@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: 
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 09-Feb-2023
Python-Version: 3.12
Post-History: `25-Jan-2023 <https://discuss.python.org/t/23149>`__,

Abstract
========

The extraction methods in ``tarfile`` gain a ``filter`` argument,
which allows rejecting files or modifying metadata as the archive is extracted.
Three built-in named filters are provided, aimed at limiting features that
might be surprising or dangerous.
These can be used as-is, or serve as a base for custom filters.

After a deprecation period, a strict (but safer) filter will become the default.

The API is meant to set a precedent for other archive libraries, such as
``zipfile``.

Motivation
==========

The ``tar`` format is used for several use cases, many of which have different
needs. For example:

- A backup of a UNIX workstation should faithfully preserve all kinds of
  details like file permissions, symlinks to system configuration, and various
  kinds of special files.
- When unpacking a data bundle, it’s much more important that the unpacking

>   will not have unintended consequences – like exposing password file by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  will not have unintended consequences – like exposing a password file by
```

  symlinking it to a public place.

To support all its use cases, the ``tar`` format has many features.
In many cases, it's best to ignore or disallow some of them when extracting
an archive.

Python allows extracting ``tar`` archives using

> ``tarfile.TarFile.extractall()``, whose docs warn to

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, but it should be a link to the 3.11 version of the docs. If I recall correctly, the syntax for that is pretty ugly.

> ``tarfile.TarFile.extractall()``, whose docs warn to

Reviewer 2: > . If I recall correctly, the syntax for that is pretty ugly.

Not really—you just prefix the name of the Intersphinx target. Assuming we added Intersphinx targets with names `pyX.Y` for the relevant versions, it would just be

```suggestion
:meth:`py3.11:tarfile.TarFile.extractall()`, whose docs warn to
```

Even without that, as a reader it still seems much more valuable to implement the cross reference than not do so, as otherwise any interested readers will just have to manually google it and either get the latest version anyway (or whatever version their search engine happens to return), or worse some crap W3Schools or GeeksForGeeks article farm page.

> ``tarfile.TarFile.extractall()``, whose docs warn to

Author: Hm. According to the [intersphinx documentation](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/intersphinx.html) it seems it should be `` :external+py3.11:meth:`tarfile.TarFile.extractall()` ``. Is the form with the `py3.11` in the backticks documented elsewhere?

I'd hope PEP readers can avoid Google's suggestions. But OK, let me add the intersphinx mapping and linkify everything.

> ``tarfile.TarFile.extractall()``, whose docs warn to

Author: I've added the intersphinx links. Maybe a bit of overkill, but without linking directly to 3.11, the links wouldn't be much better than letting people search for the terms themselves.

> ``tarfile.TarFile.extractall()``, whose docs warn to

Reviewer 2: > Hm. According to the [intersphinx documentation](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/intersphinx.html) it seems it should be `` :external+py3.11:meth:`tarfile.TarFile.extractall()` ``. Is the form with the `py3.11` in the backticks documented elsewhere?

Hmm, yeah, I noticed that in double-checking for your previous reply above. The intersphinx extension reference docs only mentioned the `external` role added by the extension (which explicitly requests lookup via Intersphinx rather than in the docs' own index), and doesn't really go into the support for naming specific intersphinx targets in the internal roles—and I'm not really sure where that _is_ discussed, as I couldn't find it—it's possible I just learned it from seeing it in other docs sites (whereas I've never seen `external` actually used anywhere).

> Maybe a bit of overkill, but without linking directly to 3.11, the links wouldn't be much better than letting people search for the terms themselves.

I definitely agree it's better to link to a specific version for posterity, in line with PEPs being historical documents and all. Thanks for adding the mapping!

*never extract archives from untrusted sources without prior inspection*.

> However, it’s not clear what kind inspection should be done.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, it’s not clear what kind of inspection should be done.
```

Indeed, it’s quite tricky to do such an inspection correctly.

> And so many people don’t bother, or do the check incorrectly, resulting in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, many people don’t bother, or do the check incorrectly, resulting in
```

security issues such as `CVE-2007-4559`_.

> Since tarfile was first written, it's become more accepted that warnings

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since ``tarfile`` was first written, it's become more accepted that warnings
```

in documentation are not enough.
Whenever possible, an unsafe operation should be *explicitly requested*;
potentially dangerous operations should *look* dangerous.

> But, ``TarFile.extractall`` looks benign in a code review.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But ``TarFile.extractall`` looks benign in a code review.
```

Tarfile extraction is also exposed via ``shutil.unpack_archive``, which allows
the user to not care about the kind of archive they're dealing with.

> The API is very inviting to extracting archives without prior inspection,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The API is very inviting for extracting archives without prior inspection,
```

- Provide a supported way to modify ``TarInfo`` when needed,
  without unnecessary work when not.
  A ``replace`` method, similar to `dataclass.replace <https://docs.python.org/3/library/dataclasses.html#dataclasses.replace>`_
  or `namedtuple._replace <https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html#collections.somenamedtuple._replace>`_,
  should do the trick.
- Provide a “filter” hook in ``extractall``'s loop that can modify or discard
  members before they are processed.
- Require that this hook is called just before extracting each member,
  so it can scan the *current* state of the disk. This will greatly simplify
  the implementation of policies (both in stdlib and user code),
  at the cost of not being able to do a precise “dry run”.

The hook API will be very similar to the existing ``filter`` argument
for ``TarFile.add``.
We'll also name it ``filter``.
(In some cases “policy” would be a more fitting name,
but the API can be used for more than security policies.)

The built-in policies/filters described above will be implemented using the
public filter API, so they can be used as building blocks or examples.

Setting a precedent
-------------------

> If and when other libraries  archive extraction, such as ``zipfile``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If and when other libraries for archive extraction, such as ``zipfile``,
```

> gain similar functionality, they should mimic the API as much as it's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
gain similar functionality, they should mimic the API as much as is
```

reasonable.

To enable this for simple cases, the built-in filters will have string names,
e.g. users can pass ``filter='data'`` instead of a specific function that deals
with ``TarInfo`` objects.

The ``shutil.extract_archive()`` function will get a ``filter`` argument,
which it will pass to ``extractall``.

> Adding *functional* API that would work across archive formats is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding a *functional* API that would work across archive formats is
```
Also, I'm not clear what "functional" means here. If it's just "functioning", you may be better off dropping the word. If it's something to do with functions, I don't understand what it means :)

Author: One that takes functions rather than strings. I guess:
```suggestion
Adding function-based API that would work across archive formats is
```

Such redistributors may want to carry vendor patches to:

* Allow configuring the defaults system-wide, and
* Change the default as soon as possible, even in older Python versions.

The proposal makes this easy to do, and it allows users to query
the settings.

Specification
=============

Modifying and forgetting member metadata
----------------------------------------

The ``TarInfo`` class will gain a new method, ``replace()``,
which will work similarly to ``dataclasses.replace``.
It will return a *deep* copy of the ``TarInfo`` object with attributes
replaced as specified by keyword-only arguments:

* ``name``
* ``mtime``
* ``mode``
* ``linkname``
* ``uid``
* ``gid``
* ``uname``
* ``gname``

Any of these, except ``name`` and ``linkname``, will be allowed to be set
to ``None``.
When ``extract`` or ``extractall`` encounters such a ``None``, it will not
set that piece of metadata, leaving it as if the file was created by ``open()``.
When ``addfile`` encounters such a ``None``, it will raise an error.
(It could also not store the attribute, if the format allows it,
but that's a possible future enhancement.)

The documentation will mention why the method is there:

> ``TarInfo`` objects retreived from ``TarFile.getmembers()`` are “live”;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``TarInfo`` objects retrieved from ``TarFile.getmembers()`` are “live”;
```

> modifiying them directly will affect subsequent unrelated operations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
modifying them directly will affect subsequent unrelated operations.
```

Filters
-------

``TarFile.extract`` and ``TarFile.extractall`` methods will grow a ``filter``

> parameter, which take a function with the signature::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameter, which takes a function with the signature::
```

* ``'tar'``: Roughly follow defaults of the GNU ``tar`` command
  (when run as a normal user):

  * Strip leading ``/`` from filenames
  * Refuse to extract files with a ``..`` component in the filename
  * Refuse to extract files whose absolute path (after following symlinks)
    would end up outside the destination.
    (Note that GNU ``tar`` instead delays creating some links.)
  * Clear high mode bits (setuid, setgid, sticky) and group/other write bits
    (``S_IWGRP|S_IWOTH``).
    (This is an approximation of ``tar``'s default, which limits the mode by
    the current ``umask`` setting.)

* ``'data'``:  Extract a "data" archive, disallowing common attack vectors
  but limiting functionality.
  In particular, many features specific to UNIX-style filesystems (or
  equivalently, to the ``tar`` archive format) are ignored, making this a good
  filter for cross-platform archives.
  In addition to ``tar``:

  * Refuse to extract links (hard or soft) which end up linking to a path
    outside of the destination.
    (On systems that don't support links, ``tarfile`` will, in most cases,
    fall back to creating regular files.
    This proposal doesn't change that behaviour.)

>   * Refuse to extract device files (incl. pipes)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  * Refuse to extract device files (including pipes).
```

  * For other files (directories), ignore mode entirely (set it to ``None``).
  * Ignore user and group info (set ``uid``, ``gid``, ``uname``, ``gname``
    to ``None``).

* ``'legacy_warning'``: Like ``'fully_trusted'``, but emit a 
  ``DeprecationWarning`` for each member that would be changed or removed under
  ``'data'``.

The corresponding filter functions will be available as
``tarfile.fully_trusted_filter()``, ``tarfile.tar_filter()``, etc., so
they can be easily used in custom policies.

FilterError
-----------

A new exception, ``FilterError``, will be added.
It'll have several new subclasses: one for each of the refusal reasons above.
``FilterError``'s ``member`` attribute will contain the relevant ``TarInfo``.

In the lists above, “refusing" to extract a file means that a ``FilterError``
will be raised.
As with other extraction errors, if the ``TarFile.errorlevel`` is 1 or more,
this will abort the extraction; with ``errorlevel=0`` the error will be
logged and the member will be ignored, but extraction will continue.
Note that ``extractall()`` may leave the archive partially extracted;
it is the user's responsibility to clean up.

> Defaults and their Configuration

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Defaults and their configuration
```

--------------------------------

``TarFile`` will get a new class member ``extraction_filter``, with the
default filter.

> This will be ``tarfile.legacy_warning_filter`` in Python 3.12 and 3.14,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This will be ``tarfile.legacy_warning_filter`` in Python 3.12 and 3.13,
```

and ``tarfile.data_filter`` from Python 3.14 on.

Applications and system integrators may wish to change ``extraction_filter``
to suit their requirements.
Users may also assign the ``extraction_filter`` attribute of an individual
``TarFile`` instance to specify the default filter.
Note that the attribute should be set to a filter function, not a string name.

.. note::

>   Allowing string would encourage code like
>   ``my_tarfile.extraction_filter = 'data'``,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Allowing strings would encourage code like
  ``my_tarfile.extraction_filter = 'data'``.
```

  On Python versions without this feature, this would do nothing,
  silently ignoring a security-related request.

Hints for further verification
------------------------------

Even with the proposed changes, ``tarfile`` will not be suited for extracting

> untrusted file without prior inspection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
untrusted files without prior inspection.
```

Among other issues, the proposed policies don't prevent denial-of-service
attacks.
Users should do additional checks.

New docs will tell users to consider:

* extracting to a new empty directory,
* checking filenames against an allow-list of characters (to filter out control
  characters, confusables, etc.),
* checking that filenames have expected extensions (discouraging files that
  execute when you “click on them”, or extension-less files like Windows
  special device names),
* limiting the total size of extracted data, size of individual files,
  and number of files,
* checking for files that would be shadowed on case-insensitive filesystems.

Also, the docs will note that:

* tar files commonly contain multiple versions of the same file: later ones are
  expected to overwrite earlier ones on extraction,

> * tarfile does not protect against issues with “live” data, e.g. an attacker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* ``tarfile`` does not protect against issues with “live” data, e.g. an attacker
```

  tinkering with the destination directory while extraction (or adding) is
  going on (see the `GNU tar manual <https://www.gnu.org/software/tar/manual/html_node/Live-untrusted-data.html#Live-untrusted-data>`__
  for more info).

This list is not comprehensive, but the documentation is a good place to
collect such general tips.
It can be moved into a separate document if grows too long or if it needs to
be consolidated with ``zipfile`` or ``shutil`` (which is out of scope for
this proposal).

Other archive libraries
-----------------------

This PEP is meant to set a precedent.

If and when other archive libraries, such as ``zipfile``, grow similar
functionality, their extraction functions should use a ``filter`` argument
that takes, at least, the strings ``'fully_trusted'`` and ``'data'``, with
semantics similar to the ones in ``tarfile``.

> Standardizing a *functional* filter API is out of scope of this PEP.

Author: ```suggestion
Standardizing a function-based filter API is out of scope of this PEP.
```

> Standardizing a *functional* filter API is out of scope of this PEP.

Reviewer 2: SGTM, at least :+1:

Shutil
------

``shutil.unpack_archive`` will gain a ``filter`` argument.
If it's given, it will be passed to the underlying extraction function.
Passing it for a ``zip`` archive will fail for now (until ``zipfile`` gains a
``filter`` argument).

If ``filter`` is not specified (or left as ``None``), it won't be passed
on, so extracting a tarball will use the default filter
(``'legacy_warning'`` for a deprecation period, then ``'data'``).

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

The proposal follows Python's :pep:`backwards compatibility policy <387>`,

> using the shortest allowed deprecation period (2 years) for the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
using the shortest allowed deprecation period (two years) for the
```

incompatible change.

Backporting & Forward Compatibility
===================================

This feature may be backported to older versions of Python.

> In CPython, we don't add adding warnings to patch releases, so the default

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In CPython, we don't add warnings to patch releases, so the default
```

filter should be changed to ``'fully_trusted'`` in backports.

Other than that, *all* of the changes to ``tarfile`` should be backported, so
``hasattr(tarfile, 'data_filter')`` becomes a reliable check for all
of the new functionality.

> Note that CPython's usual policy is to avoid adding new API in security

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that CPython's usual policy is to avoid adding new APIs in security
```

backports.

> This feature does not make sense without new API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This feature does not make sense without a new API
```

(``TarFile.extraction_filter`` and the ``filter`` argument),
so we'll make an exception.

> (See `Discourse comment 23149/16 <https://discuss.python.org/t/23149/16?u=encukou>`__

Author: Thanks!

for details.)

Here are examples of code that takes into account that ``tarfile`` may or may
not not have the proposed feature.

> When copying these snippets, note that setting ``extraction_filter``,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When copying these snippets, note that setting ``extraction_filter``
```

will affect subsequent operations.

* Fully trusted archive::

    my_tarfile.extraction_filter = (lambda member: member)
    my_tarfile.extractall()

* Use the ``'data'`` filter if available, but revert to Python 3.11 behavior
  (``'fully_trusted'``) if this feature is not available::

    my_tarfile.extraction_filter = getattr(tarfile, 'data_filter', lambda x: x)
    my_tarfile.extractall()

  (This is an unsafe operation, so it should be spelled out explicitly,
  ideally with a comment.)

* Use the ``'data'`` filter, *fail* if it is not available::

    my_tarfile.extractall(filter=tarfile.data_filter)

  or::

    my_tarfile.extraction_filter = tarfile.data_filter
    my_tarfile.extractall()

* Use the ``'data'`` filter, *warn* if it is not available::

   if hasattr(tarfile, 'data_filter'):
       my_tarfile.extractall(filter='data')
   else:
       # remove this when no longer needed

>        warn('Extracting may be unsafe, consider updating Python')

Author: I meant it as a generic function the user would supply. Perhaps:
```suggestion
       warn_the_user('Extracting may be unsafe; consider updating Python')
```

       my_tarfile.extractall()

Security Implications
=====================

This proposal improves security, at the expense of backwards compatibility.
In particular, it will help users avoid `CVE-2007-4559`_.

How to Teach This
=================

The API, usage notes and tips for further verification will be added to
the documentation.

> These should be usable for users that know extracting an archive, but are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These should be usable for users who know about extracting an archive, but are
```

Reviewer 2: Or:

```suggestion
These should be usable for users who know how to extract an archive, but are
```

not familiar with the specifics of UNIX filesystems nor the related security
issues.

Reference Implementation
========================

XXX None yet.

Rejected Ideas
==============

SafeTarFile
-----------

An initial idea from Lars Gustäbel was to provide a separate class that
implements security checks (see `gh-65308`_).
There are two major issues with this approach:

> * The name is misleading. General achive operations can never be made “safe”

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* The name is misleading. General archive operations can never be made “safe”
```

  from all kinds of unwanted behavior, without impacting legitimate use cases.
* It does not solve the problem of unsafe defaults.

However, many of the ideas behind SafeTarFile were reused in this PEP.

Add absolute_path option to tarfile
-----------------------------------

> A minimal change to check the “CVE resolved” box doesn't go far enough to

Reviewer 2: Perhaps worth being slightly more explicit about what such a proposed option was intended to do (I'm assuming something related to disallowing tar files with absolute paths, but what specifically?) And I'm not sure what "option" is intended to mean in this context—is this module data? A class attribute? A function/method parameter? To what, specifically?

> protect the unaware, nor to empower the dilligent and curious.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
protect the unaware, nor to empower the diligent and curious.
```

    my_tarfile.extractall()

  (This is an unsafe operation, so it should be spelled out explicitly,
  ideally with a comment.)

* Use the ``'data'`` filter; *fail* if it is not available::

    my_tarfile.extractall(filter=tarfile.data_filter)

  or::

    my_tarfile.extraction_filter = tarfile.data_filter
    my_tarfile.extractall()

* Use the ``'data'`` filter; *warn* if it is not available::

   if hasattr(tarfile, 'data_filter'):
       my_tarfile.extractall(filter='data')
   else:
       # remove this when no longer needed
       warn_the_user('Extracting may be unsafe; consider updating Python')
       my_tarfile.extractall()

Security Implications
=====================

This proposal improves security, at the expense of backwards compatibility.
In particular, it will help users avoid `CVE-2007-4559`_.

How to Teach This
=================

The API, usage notes and tips for further verification will be added to
the documentation.
These should be usable for users who are familiar wth archives in general, but
not with the specifics of UNIX filesystems nor the related security issues.

Reference Implementation
========================

> Draft implementation: https://github.com/python/cpython/compare/main...encukou:cpython:tarfile-dir-traversal-sq

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Draft implementation <https://github.com/python/cpython/compare/main...encukou:cpython:tarfile-dir-traversal-sq>`__
```

Avoid an ugly, space-consuming and non-a11y-friendly raw URL (or you could give it an appropriate descriptive link title)

Author: I prefer to put the full link here. An inline link suggests it goes to additional information or sources. This one is basically the whole section, and it's not part of a paragraph that would be hard to scan.
The a11y-friendliness angle might be a concern, but IMO, general a11y guidelines are for running text. When I imagine listening to the PEP, the long form doesn't seem bad.

Author: I guess I can make it a paragraph though!

Abstract
========

> The extraction methods in :external+py3.11:mod:`tarfile` gain a ``filter`` argument,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The extraction methods in :mod:`py3.11:tarfile` gain a ``filter`` argument,
```

As you mentioned, the full `:external:` form is quite long and ugly; I would suggest just using the shorter and much more widely used (AFAIK) prefix form instead, but ultimately up to you of course.

Author: I asked on the docs discord. I'd rather not rely on an undocumented feature, too often those turn out to be implementation accidents or have weird edge cases that change a few years later.

Reviewer 2: Based on @AA-Turner 's response there, it turns out both are fully supported and the shorter form more widely used, but of course up to your preference if we want to go back through it at some point and change it.
